Oh, no.
And, of course, one of the reasons they... We'll go back on again.
But, I mean, you might just... In chatting with them, bring up her name.
No, no, no, no, no.
I will let it alone.
At some point, it's going to be public.
At some point, it'll come out somewhere in a story about them.
See, they know I'm here today, number one.
No, no, no.
And number two, they know I know about Ariana.
Nick, Nick.
I ain't going to ever mention it to them until I first see it in print.
Okay, good.
Okay, okay.
But it's an amusing little tinder, isn't it?
They've got every right-winger in the country.
She's just one more nodding.
Yeah, they've got the whole bloody gallery of them.
Red travels around, you know.
And I'm sure that's why Lynn went to Washington to speak about the new thing.
I think Glenn distanced himself a little bit from that.
Because the word they put out was that Lynn was... Lynn was... Yeah, I know they put out the word, but it ain't true.
In fact, the only... Glenn was here yesterday visiting us and bringing us some nice tomatoes, which he'd grown, and... the only harsh moment came when I said joyfully, well, we're up 15 points above you again.
We're certainly going to win the election.
And Glenn's face got very dark, and he said, no, he said...
Because Kenneth Starr is going to come out with the real stuff, and we're going to indict him in Hillary.
We're going to.
And Kenneth Starr is about as much of an assassin as I've ever seen in my life.
My dear, they are all a pack of fascists.
Even our dear friends.
Never mind.
But that's politics.
All right.
That's politics.
Yes.
If you'd like, and I'll say this while the tape is running, um,
I'd be more than happy for the book now, not for the column, but would you like me to run your quotes by you before I use them for this book?
The context will be beautiful.
I'm in your corner.
Nicholas, I trust you.
You don't have to write anything by me.
I mean, I too am fearful.
I'd like, when the column comes out, because I might not run into it otherwise, I'd like to send it to me.
And when the book comes out, Glenn will send me a copy anyway.
Okay, but you feel comfortable with my doing?
Perfectly comfortable.
You don't have to check any.
This book will be published in 1999.
It's going to be books, book culture, the relevance of the text, where we're going.
And you mentioned information.
Now, this is being touted as the information agent.
Oh, it's a horrible idea.
What is information?
Information is data.
That's all a computer does.
The best thing about, quote that marvelous moment in John Ashbery's great poem, Soonest Mended, where he asked, was it information?
Of course, that's always the question.
Was it information?
That's excellent.
That's wonderful.
Look at the poem called Soonest Mended by John Ashbery.
I've heard all of Ashbery as well.
Terrific poem.
But it goes back to information.
So what is information?
Is it wisdom?
Is it knowledge?
It's not knowledge, is it?
I mean, you don't fool around with a computer, do you?
You don't download it.
Well, as I said in this book, information is a parody of gnosis.
You know, gnosis is knowing.
Gnosis is wisdom.
It's a wonderful Greek word.
I'm Greek.
Yes, I know.
It is very much a Greek name.
Including the Nicholas.
You look tired today.
Oh, I'm always tired, my dear.
Do you still suffer from insomnia?
Oh, I had a terrible night last night.
I'm a terrible non-sleeper.
And I was sad, too, because I go back to work next week.
Wednesday's my first class, but my wife, who works as a school psychologist out in Brantford, Connecticut...
I've been so used to her company these last eight weeks.
She went back to work today.
So I'm sad about that.
Also, the New York Yankees are self-destroying.
The Red Sox are on their way.
Yes, I know.
I adored them this summer, and all of a sudden I looked, and they're only four games behind the Yankees.
The Yankees are in a state of...
The Red Sox are caught up to Baltimore, eh?
They're just two games behind Baltimore and four behind the Yankees.
No, Baltimore's four behind the Yankees.
The Red Sox this morning, it's only four games.
The Yankees are self-destructing.
The Yankees are self-destructing, but they're still four ahead of Baltimore.
That could be.
Okay, the Red Sox are two behind Baltimore.
So they're six behind us.
But the way things are going, the Yankees are not going to win.
They're not even going to be a wild card.
Four games is a...
But we've played them the last eight days of the season.
That's right.
And that's where it's all going to come together, right?
Well, it may come together.
There are three more games between the Yanks and Baltimore.
But on the other hand, Mr. Cullen is returning.
He is.
Our savior.
We have Mr. Ken Sinkle coming back.
But Clemens has been pitching very well.
Clemens has been pitching well.
But if Mr. Cullen comes back and can pitch every fifth day, then we have a chance.
I did an interview two weeks ago with Stephen Jay Gould.
He has a home now in Soho.
Yes, yes, yes.
Very far away.
Very interesting man.
Yes, an interesting fellow.
And I go into his room, his reading room, his library, and he has seven inscribed baseballs over there.
He has two Joe DiMaggio's, two Mickey Mantle's, and Hank Aaron.
He must be as sad at the moment as I am.
He sounds like an anxious man.
That was two weeks ago.
He was riding high.
Oh, I have felt it coming for four weeks now.
They have not been playing.
No.
They're falling apart.
And Torrey looks more... Let's change the subject.
Okay.
I'll just tell you the seventh baseball that he has, which I love.
He has a wealth ranker.
I said, oh, boy, that's what I wouldn't give to owner Ralph Branca and a Billy Buckner, you know.
The two famous bad villains.
Yeah, but of course, he said, well, the Branca would be better if Bobby Thompson had signed it, too, and it would be if you're thinking about it.
Anyway, baseball.
We're going off in baseball.
You know, you were mentioning these.
You certainly are, for as much as you read,
You remain an astute observer of social behavior.
You mentioned things like the near-death experience and this new age stuff that people are talking about.
You mentioned rock and roll and MTV.
You must maintain a pretty observant eye about what's social.
I mean, I know sometimes people can see you, perceive you as the absent-minded professor, you know.
I have in many ways absent.
Why is it about to know?
falling downstairs or forgetting to do something I'm supposed to do and so on, but I'm pretty well aware where we live and as we live and what is going on.
It is appalling.
Which is almost part of the curse, isn't it?
Because you can see where we're going.
Oh, we are.
I mean, I'm going to vote for Clinton for dear life, even though I loathe that welfare signing, because he's all we've got against these monsters.
The idea of having a Republican Congress and Senate and Bob Dole, we're going to go even faster.
I can tell you where we're going.
I think we're going to have wealthier riots.
I think we're going to have ungovernable inner cities.
In fact, I see a show in that book.
You say that.
You actually anticipate this whole bill that was signed to a week ago.
Yeah, and I didn't know anything about it at all.
No, I prophesy on that.
How do you look at a kid and say, we're not going to feed you anymore?
A little kid.
We're not going to give you medicine.
Under Reagan, TB came back.
What are you talking about?
That swine Pete Wilson in California happily signed an executive order for the state of California based on the federal welfare bill that our slick willy has just signed.
I saw this yesterday.
He was signing the ordinance on the basis of which...
medicine will be denied, medical care will be denied to the children of illegal immigrants, and they're going to be thrown out of school.
They're not going to be taken into school in a day or two when they start up in California.
Amazing.
And if they get sick, they're going to be allowed to die.
And the fascist Republican platform, which the Emily Dole says he hasn't read, calls for
Children born on United States soil who are the children of illegal immigrants are not to be considered American citizens.
Does that sound constitutional?
This is a proposed amendment to the Constitution, just as the making abortion a crime is a proposed... What they intend to do is repeal the Bill of Rights, and they intend to repeal... Of course, they want to keep the gun provision in there.
If they had their way...
Every Republican in the country would have his or her own 50-caliber machine gun.
And if you or I insult her Ariana, she would cut us down.
I'm sure, with an Uzi.
She's probably quite adept at using.
They're all gun nuts.
Let's get back into it.
Philip Ratha, who you... Philip is a close personal friend.
And at this moment, setting a few poets aside...
Philip is, I think, the best writer in this country.
I have just read, it's over there on the couch, his new novel called American Pastel, which is a very sad and beautiful novel, which he sent me in manuscript, and which is a remarkable departure for him.
He has, as I understand it, he has profound attitudes about how many legitimate and genuine readers there are.
Philip and I have had many conversations about this.
Philip always shocks me.
I told him once, Philip, when we were having dinner, I said, you sound to me like the editor of the old forwards, you know, the Yiddish newspaper, who couldn't bear to read the obituaries because he was losing readers all the time and they couldn't be replaced.
Philip says, Harold, that's exactly the way I feel.
I feel that as my readers die, they are not being replaced.
that there are fewer and fewer people who are truly literate in the United States.
Do you subscribe to this whole dumbing down phrase?
No.
I dislike the phrase in the extreme.
I don't think that we're seeing the dumbing of America.
I think we are seeing the betrayal of civilized literacy
and aesthetic and intellectual standards by the two groups of people who were supposed to protect it.
On the one hand, the university teachers in the humanities, and on the other hand, the supposedly upper-level journalists of the New York Times variety.
I think the two groups have sold out together.
They've sold out?
Yeah, they've sold out.
They've sold out to what they feel makes them fashionable.
They've sold out to so-called multiculturalism.
They've sold out to... The real enemy of what I'm talking about in that book, though I only use the phrase once or twice, is rock religion.
As I say in the book, there was a very brief moment about 1968 or 69...
When what was going on, you know, with the onion rock really was a kind of religious frenzy.
And the moment passed, and it simply became a kind of mechanical reproduction, which is what they've got now.
I think there was something there which tapped into some of the deep roots of American religion.
But what we have now is just so deplorable.
I hope you don't mind my jumping around, but you mentioned in other previous interviews that this journey that you've been on, and I wonder how this new book, where this fits in.
I am writing, what you see all around you is a vast book on Shakespeare.
This is the book I've always wanted to write, and this is my magnum of this,
This is for Riverhead Putnam, the same people who did the paperback of the Western canon who have just published, or were the moment published, God willing.
Omens of Millennium is a book called The Invention of the Human.
The Invention of the Human.
Characters of Shakespeare's plays, and it would be 1,000 pages long, and will be an attempt to get back to the study of character as being what is crucial in Shakespeare's invention of us as we are now.
And it will be a defense of the idea of talking about Shakespearean character.
And it will be in dissent against everything that now goes on in writing about teaching and even acting Shakespeare, because I think we are debasing Shakespeare in the most hideous kind of a way.
And you're going to talk about a journey.
I think that ends me on the literary side.
I don't think when I finish this book in progress...
I think my work as a literary critic will be done.
I still feel that I have work to do as a religious critic, as I call it, but I can't at the moment say where I will go with it.
I don't know.
A lot depends upon whether or not there is an intelligent reaction to this Omens of Millennium book.
which I really do not expect.
I mean, I know there have been two or three intelligent ones already, and clearly you are a highly sensitive and intelligent reaction to it.
And maybe I'll get three or four more, but I think in general I will not get understanding for it.
The good news about my piece is that it now runs in 25 newspapers.
and largely university.
I've syndicated myself.
You live in Worcester, my dear.
Grafton, which is right next to Worcester.
Oh, that means you get to go to that nice art museum, the Clarke.
The Worcester Art Museum, which is wonderful.
Well, I thought that was affiliated to Clarke University.
No, actually it's where you're on.
Isn't Clarke in Worcester?
Clarke is.
Doesn't Clarke have an art gallery?
I've mixed up the two.
I always sort of belonged to Clark.
No.
In fact, I'm the immediate past president of the Friends of the Library, Clark.
I see.
I never went to Clark, but I always say that.
You have to help books.
But the American Antiquariate Society is in Worcester, which is a very important repository
Your family is in Worcester?
My family, most of the Greeks who came to this country went to Lowell, believe it or not.
I know that, yes.
And so I grew up in Lowell, actually.
I see.
But my parents are there.
My father is 85 now.
God bless him.
You would be about 50?
I'm 53.
Oh, you're a little bear.
I'm 66.
Time marches on.
Do you have siblings?
Your mama, alas, is gone.
No, my mother is.
Oh, good.
Vigorous, travels, continues to travel.
How old is mama?
She's 75.
Oh, much younger than papa.
But I'm nine years older than my wife.
It happens.
Do you have children?
Two daughters.
How old are they?
They are 15 and 13, and they are wonderful readers.
I see how wonderful.
They may be the last readers, my dear.
And they read twice as fast as I do.
When I read how you can do four or five hundred or six hundred pages an hour, I'm in awe of that.
I'm a much slower reader, but I'm a very appreciative and thorough reader.
I have to say, even though it's a steady pace, I can accelerate it if I have to.
I can do maybe 100, 200 pages an hour if I have to.
But I would much rather take it, it's like reading Shakespeare.
Who wants to speed read Shakespeare?
You can't tell me you speed read Shakespeare.
No, no, no.
But I know it all by heart anyway.
You know it all by heart.
It doesn't matter.
Even the obscure plays?
Oh, sure.
I've taught all 38 of them again and again.
For the last 12 years, I've done nothing to teach Shakespeare.
That is absolute.
So I'm very deep in all of them.
And, you know, I've been... This last year I've been writing very hard about Shakespeare all the time, and I will spend the next year writing very hard about it.
Whether I'll finish on time or not, I don't know.
I'd like to have this finished a year from now, but I may not be able to.
I know I asked you the last time... I know it's an unfair question, but it's the famous Desert Island question.
Shakespeare...
Is the answer?
Shakespeare.
Shakespeare, and then for a second book, yeah, I would choose.
In fact, it would be hard to choose between the Hebrew Bible and the King James.
It would be a very difficult choice.
I guess I would want all three.
I guess I'd want a text of the Hebrew Bible.
I would want the King James Bible, and I would want Shakespeare.
I guess those would be the three books.
If I could have a fourth, I would want a Dante.
If I could have a fifth, I would want Cervantes.
After that, it would be very hard to say.
Are there any books that you haven't read that you would want, that you just haven't had time to read?
Have you basically read everything that you feel you want?
There's a wonderful line of Malamés, which is best translated as, The flesh is sad, alas, and I have read all the books.
The flesh is sad, alas, and I have read all the books.
And you have read them all.
I think I have read all the books.
But by now I've re-read all the books.
I've done nothing but read, and I go on reading.
And I re-read things all the time.
I mean, I re-read Shakespeare daily.
I recite poems to myself all the time, anyway, as I walk around.
After you go today, I will go on my Constitutional, and I will just recite poems to myself as I go...
Do you have any thoughts on the American novel as we approach this next millennium?
Oh, sure.
I think Philip is the best we have right now.
We had a fascinating, epic narrative writer, I wouldn't quite call him a novelist, and Thomas Pynchon, but he's gone to hell.
I mean, there was the splendid of somewhat juvenile V, and it was a brilliant short novel, The Crime of Life, 49,
Then there was the extraordinary prose epic, almost a sort of Moby Dick of our time, Gravity's Rainbow.
But then came a long silence, and then he produced a piece of absolute garbage, which I frequently can't believe he actually wrote.
Somebody else must have written it.
Yeah, it was.
I couldn't believe it.
I read through it.
I couldn't find a phrase, a redeeming sentence, a redeeming moment.
And he's been silent since.
He seems to be a complete burned-out case.
I don't know what happened to him.
It's quite reclusive, as I understand it.
No.
He's published by Hope.
We have the same... No.
We don't have the same editor.
Whereas Roth, I must say, has gone from strength to strength.
I find amazing what Philip Roth has been able to do.
This is quite a side from any personal feeling I have for the man, and we are good friends, but I think we became good friends because I liked the work so much.
Um,
The four Zuckerman novels, Ending in the Prague Orgy, are marvelous.
And then came The Counter-Life, and then came the wonderful memoir, The Patrimony.
And then came that shockingly powerful book called Sabbath's Theater, and now this extraordinary, immensely sad book called American Pastoral.
I think Philip is probably the best we've got right now.
And if you were to describe a
I mean, can you articulate what it is?
Yeah, painful laughter.
The extraordinary, sort of morally painful laughter, a laughter which is so profoundly offended by what we have done to ourselves and what our society has done to itself and what life itself seems to do to itself.
It's a kind of...
comic art carried almost to the point of hysteria.
It's quite frightening in its implications.
And you see him improving, basically.
Philip amazes me because each book has been better than the one before, and now they're getting more and more different.
Sabbath Theatre had nothing in common with the previous work, and this American Pastoral has nothing in common with Sabbath Theatre or with Operation Shylock, which I thought was a wonderful book.
This is
Completely different.
It's got a sympathetic hero, though a tragic one.
Poor fellow who's a glove manufacturer in New Jersey who has nothing in common with Roth, nothing in common with these Zuckerman figures of any sort, and who is a victim of the 60s because his life is basically destroyed by his daughter, who becomes one of those weatherwomen bomb manufacturers and throwers.
You know, it just turns him inside out.
It's just scary.
And yet, in the midst of it, there's still that terrible, painful laughter that rises up.
It's quite extraordinary.
You have read thousands of books, and when we're talking about the creative spirit, do you have an answer?
Do you have any idea where it comes from?
I mean, is it innate?
Is it a gift?
I take it, my dear...
that that's partly what I was up to in the book you kindly just read, that I think when I speak of the best and oldest part of ourselves, which I call the gnosis or the spark, which is the traditional way of it, I take it that in some of us it ensues in contemplation or it ensues in a critical faculty.
And in some of us...
that rises up out of a deep well and becomes a creative spark or element.
But I think in this, as in most things, I'm just repeating Emerson quite consciously.
I mean, basically I think I've just written an Emersonian book and I quite deliberately, you know, called the first part of it self-reliance or mere gnosticism.
because one is trying to extend Emerson into the present time.
This is another really totally far-fetched question, but we are certainly in awe of imagination and the creator of the spirit.
But let's say you could wave Prospero's One and you could spend an hour with Shakespeare.
Do you have any idea what you'd like to talk to him about in one hour?
Oh, sure.
There's a lot I would like to talk to him about.
Specific things or creative things?
Oh, yes.
I would like to talk to him not so much about the sonnets, which I am content to have remained basically a mystery, but I would very much like to talk to him about some of the characters and some of the players.
I would like to talk to him about the relationship between Macbeth and Lady Macbeth as he understood it.
I would very much like to talk to him about whether or not, as I deeply suspect, there's a kind of absolute nihilism that underlies the four major tragedies.
I guess I'd like to ask him how he really felt about Christopher Marlowe.
since I feel increasingly that is a clue to him.
I love Marlowe.
Yeah, but I think Marlowe was for him both a blessing and a curse.
Do you think Marlowe was the better poet?
No.
No?
I mean, for that, for up to the age of 29, shall we say?
No.
I mean, the first one... I think if Shakespeare had died at 29, we would rank him below Marlowe.
Um, but he didn't die at 29.
Um,
Also, I begin to wonder, as you'll see when this book comes out, I'm part of the company from one or two Shakespeareans.
I agree with the late Professor Peter Alexander, the Scottish scholar, that the so-called Orr Hamlet, always attributed to Thomas Kidd on no basis whatsoever by traditional Shakespeare scholarship, was written by Shakespeare himself.
Really?
So that there was a first Hamlet way back there,
probably much under the influence of Marlowe's Jew of Malta, and a very different play from what we have now, probably in existence by 1587, making it one of Shakespeare's earliest plays.
What did you base this on?
Oh, the plays that you base it on.
We know that there was an earlier Hamlet.
Wasn't there a Saxo Germanicus?
Yeah, yeah, there's that.
But we know that there was a play, Hamlet,
And we know that when Shakespeare, in 1589, joined what was later to be called the Lord Chamberlain's Men, suddenly, for the first time, three plays appear in their repertory that weren't there before.
One is Titus Andromachus, another is The Taming of the Shrew, and the third is a play called Hamlet.
And these are supposedly during the lost years, what we call the lost years, and I think there's
Well, yeah, it's just after the so-called lost years.
But here's the point.
They were not licensed to perform any play by Thomas Kidd.
They could not perform the Spanish tragedy, which was vastly part of which they would have liked to perform.
They were performing a play called Hamlet.
They performed it after Shakespeare joined them as an active playwright.
He brought it with him.
and it was his play.
And then he turned against it, and he revised it completely and made it into a very different Hamlet.
I've written a chapter about that in this forthcoming book.
And this idea is not original with me.
This is the late Professor Peter Alexander, a very fine Scottish Shakespearean of the middle century, or I guess the 1940s and so.
But for some reason, people have not taken this seriously.
even though there's no evidence that the Orr Hamlet so-called had ever existed.
There is no lost play by Thomas Kidd.
We have no evidence for that whatsoever.
Shakespeare appears to have written Hamlet twice.
And you see parallels in the writing and the poetry?
Yes, but this is one of the things I want to ask him.
And if I had just one question I could ask him,
It would be sure.
Surely, as Professor Peter Alexander and I have surmised, you and not Thomas Kidd or some imitator of Kidd wrote the Orr Hamlet back there around 1587 or so, and then you got very unhappy with it about 1589 or so, and then you rewrote it completely in 1600, 1601, and made it the Hamlet we have now.
I guess that's the primary thing I want to ask him.
Does it bother you that he apparently never attempted to publish his plays?
Oh, that's not quite true.
That's a very complicated matter.
I believe that had he lived, he would have emulated his friend and rival, Ben Johnson, and would have prepared a folio edition.
I think that Hemmings and Kondo, with Johnson's help, were tearing out a wish that he had expressed.
So you think that Johnson, as Talia said,
It's quite possible.
He certainly helped them with it.
But something else also, the authorized quarters, you know, the second quarters, which correct the bad ones and so on, in some cases it is pretty clearly a case of Shakespeare himself coming forward, either because he doesn't like the earlier version and has revised, and we realize the features are so bad, though.
Or just doesn't like exactly what's going on there.
because they've been badly reported or pirated or whatever.
I think it's very complex, the whole question of publication.
If Shakespeare's manuscripts existed, would the plays be different for you?
Would they read differently?
Would you like to read them?
This is a silly question, I guess, but we're talking about text.
Sure one would love to read that.
And we could get Shakespeare strictly through a printed text, which is amazing.
If we had his file papers, that would be very fine.
The only Shakespearean manuscript we have, besides a few signatures and a few legal things, is a little chunk of Sir Thomas More.
That's all we've got.
And you absolutely believe that is Shakespeare?
Oh, yeah, I think so.
I think they pretty well demonstrated that.
Just as I believe, you know, what some of these young men have found recently, I don't think that this elegy...
for Will Peter is a great poem, though it's not as bad as some people say it is, but I think it is by Shakespeare.
I think so.
And you've been so generous with your time, and if you don't mind, at some point, if there are other questions, I can give you a call.
Oh, of course, dear fellow, of course.
You have my phone number.
Do you have my New York phone number, which is also unlisted?
I don't.
This weekend, my wife and I will be here.
But after that, every weekend we will be at this number, at 212, my dear, 260-7085.
That's in Manhattan.
212-260-7085.
No, no, my dear, when you prepare this column and then when you prepare something for the book, just phone me, my dear.
We are friends, dear Nicholas, we are friends.
And just quickly, if you could just give me one quote on this.
the school of resentment which you wrote about... Well, you know, I took it from Nietzsche.
I quoted that, in fact, in the Western canon when he speaks of the man or woman of resentment, using it in French, whose soul squints, as he put it.
And I just felt that it was... Since I think ultimately...
These are people who resent literature itself, who resent Shakespeare, really, who resent the greatness that they are shamed by.
I thought it was the proper thing to call them, that it seems to have stuck.
My other phrase for them has stuck as well, a rabblement of lemmings, which I like.
Well, the lemmings comes from one of Thurib's fables for our time, about the lemmings rushing down to the sea.
And The Rattlemen is a marvelous coinage of James Joyce, the young James Joyce, who replied to the Irish critics who had rioted when the Abbey put on productions of Ibsen.
He wrote a pamphlet called The Day of the Rattlemen.
Wow.
I've got it right here, The Lemmings and Alice Walker.
You know, he just makes...
Poor Alice Walker.
I met her once years ago.
She was a charming lady, and I'm sure she was a charming lady.
She probably hates my guts now.
I think there's some bitterness with that woman, though.
Oh, she's very bitter.
But I'm not attacking her personally, obviously.
It's just that the exaltation.
I mean, there are some very bad writers in this country who are exalted just because they are black and because they are women.
Adrian Rich is a very bad poet who is exalted just because, you know, she is a lesbian prophetess.
Alice Walker is an extremely bad novelist and essayist and poet who is exalted just because she is a very aggressive, resentful black woman.
And came along at that time.
Are you familiar with this book?
I think, in fact, I think Glenn and Lynn...
were the agents on this one, by the woman at Wellesley about not out of Africa?
Mary Lefkowitz.
Lefkowitz.
Very bright girl.
She was at this point, by the way.
I know Mary.
Mary is a very bright girl, and I believe she's married to my old child, you, Lloyd-Jones.
Yeah.
In fact, I introduced myself to her, and I'm going to talk to her.
Mary is a fine lady, a very fine lady.
And then, of course, this concept, when they are attacking the Western canon, the phrase they invariably use is,
Dead white men.
So dismissively.
Dead white European males.
Jwems.
The Jwems.
Dead white European males.
That is to say, Shakespeare, Dante, Huma.
Cervantes, the whole world.
Cervantes, Tolstoy, Wordsworth.
Charles Dickens.
Oh, all of them.
James Joyce, Franz Kafka, Marcel Proust, another dead white Montaigne, Emerson, Whitman, or dead white, well, no, some of them are not European, but, or dead white American males.
Are they impossible?
You come to a lot of stuff.
They are just impossible.
But, you know, Nicholas, I'm very grateful to you because as I said to you over the phone, and I'll say to you again for the second time today,
Due to the vicissitudes, normally when a book of mine is coming out, they send me a big batch of them, and I distribute them to friends, and I get some feedback.
With this book, my friend Jonathan Spence, who's off in England, so I haven't had any... I mean, no one has read it except my agents and my editor and a few people, so you're my first reader.
And I'll tell you, the writing is very clean.
Thank you, thank you.
Well, I'm very pleased.
I have seen a review coming out by Michael Derda, the editor of Washington Post Book World, which is coming out in the magazine Civilization, and I've seen a crazy review, wild and flamboyant, by my former doctoral student, the wild Frank McConnell, which is going to come out in the Boston Sunday Globe, and I had read to me over the phone this piece that came out as a sort of op-ed column in last Sunday's Baltimore Sun,
But those are the only reactions I have so far, and you are the first reader I've been able to talk to face-to-face.
So you cheered me up a lot when I needed it.
My feeling is it's hard, because these are anxious times, waiting for the birth of the child and the delivery of the child.
Well, I don't have high expectations.
I don't have high expectations.
The humor comes through, by the way.
I tried to discipline the humor more than I had in the American religion or the Western canon.
I tried to keep it from getting out of hand.
But it's a gentle humor.
Would you do me the honor of inscribing a couple of... Oh, my dear fellow.
I would be honored.
I cannot ask you to inscribe your splendid book because my copy was sent to me in my
apartment in New York, and I read it in New York, and it was in my bookshelf in New York.
This is a great... It's like I told my wife I want to bring three.
Okay, thanks a lot.
I know this seems excessive.
No, not at all, my dear.
I am honored.